OSSM 3.0 TP1 OSSM-8153 [DOC] OSSM 3.x Concepts (#83560)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-about-concepts-kiali.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// about/ossm-about-concepts-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="ossm-about-concepts-kiali_{context}"]

> = {KialiProduct}

Reviewer: The product name is really `Kiali Operator by Red Hat`?

Reviewer 2: I had the same thought and mentioned it below in my own comment. It does result in some odd phrases that aren't technically correct.

Author: Yep. In the UI, users can either select "Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat" or the Kiali Community Operator. For prod docs, it is "Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat."

> {KialiProduct} provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices in your service mesh, and how they are connected.

Reviewer: This is what it does but maybe having one short sentence on what it is would be good too. It's "the UI for istio" or "the console for service mesh", however you want to say that.

> {KialiProduct} provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices in your service mesh, and how they are connected.

Reviewer 2: What does the `{KialiProduct}` template result in? Because if it is "Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat" then this is a little odd to me. For example, look [here at the TP1 docs](https://docs.openshift.com/service-mesh/3.0.0tp1/kiali/ossm-kiali-assembly.html#ossm-kiali-about_ossm-kiali-assembly) where it says,
```
Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat is the management console for Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh
``` 
That isn't correct. The Operator isn't the management console - the Server is.

The same thing here - if `{KialiProduct}` results in `Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat` then it really isn't true that `Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices in your service mesh, and how they are connected.` --- that's the Server, not the Operator.

Author: Then I need to know what other attributes for Kiali are needed. When I have tried to just use "Kiali," doc peer reviewers have come back with "{KialiProduct} is the attribute so use that here."

Reviewer 2: I don't know how you want to do it using this doc-ese template stuff, but it should result in something like:
```
Kiali provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices in your service mesh, and how they are connected
```
In short, it isn't the OPERATOR that does all that - its the Kiali Server (or just plain "Kiali") - again, not sure how it should be worded, I just know how it should NOT be worded :)

Kiali provides observability into the Service Mesh running on OpenShift Container Platform. Kiali helps you define, validate, and observe your Istio service mesh. It helps you to understand the structure of your service mesh by inferring the topology, and also provides information about the health of your service mesh.

> Kiali provides an interactive graph view of your namespace in real time that provides visibility into features like circuit breakers, request rates, latency, and even graphs of traffic flows. Kiali offers insights about components at different levels, from Applications to Services and Workloads, and can display the interactions with contextual information and charts on the selected graph node or edge.

Reviewer 2: First, it probably is not entirely accurate to say "real time" -- I would say "near real time".
Second, I think `namespace` here should at least be plural (the graph view shows more than just one namespace); I would even consider saying "your mesh namespaces":

```suggestion
Kiali provides an interactive graph view of your mesh namespaces in near real time that provides visibility into features like circuit breakers, request rates, latency, and even graphs of traffic flows. Kiali offers insights about components at different levels, from Applications to Services and Workloads, and can display the interactions with contextual information and charts on the selected graph node or edge.
```

Kiali also provides the ability to validate your Istio configurations, such as gateways, destination rules, virtual services, mesh policies, and more. Kiali provides detailed metrics, and a basic Grafana integration is available for advanced queries. Distributed tracing is provided by integrating {TempoName} and {OTELName} into the Kiali console.

> == {KialiProduct} architecture

Reviewer: When you interpolate the variable `Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat architecture` it makes it sounds like the Kiali Operator is provided by "Red Hat architecture".

> Kiali is based on the open source link:https://kiali.io/[Kiali project]. Kiali is composed of two components: the Kiali application and the Kiali console.

Reviewer 2: We normally call it the Kiali Server (not the Kiali application). And, in fact, on the very next line (line 20), it does use the term `Kiali Server`. For consistency here in the docs, and how we historically call it, I would change application to server:
```suggestion
Kiali is based on the open source link:https://kiali.io/[Kiali project]. Kiali is composed of two components: the Kiali Server and the Kiali console.
```

> Kiali Server (back end):: This component runs in the container application platform and communicates with the service mesh components, retrieves and processes data, and exposes this data to the console. The Kiali application does not need storage. When deploying the application to a cluster, configurations are set in ConfigMaps and secrets.

Reviewer 2: Again the usage of "application" makes it seem like there is a different component here, when it is all talking about the same thing (the Server).  Replace `application` with `Server` for consistency.

```suggestion
Kiali Server (back end):: This component runs in the container application platform and communicates with the service mesh components, retrieves and processes data, and exposes this data to the console. The Kiali Server does not need storage. When deploying the Server to a cluster, configurations are set in ConfigMaps and secrets.
```

> Kiali console (front end):: The Kiali console is a web application. 	The Kiali application serves the Kiali console, which then queries the Kiali Server for data to present it to the user.

Reviewer: The Kiali backend is what serves the Kiali console. When the user opens the Kiali console in their browser, the application queries the Kiali backend for data.

> Kiali console (front end):: The Kiali console is a web application. 	The Kiali application serves the Kiali console, which then queries the Kiali Server for data to present it to the user.

Reviewer 2: Here I'm confused. This definitely makes it seem like the Kiali application is a different component than the Kiali Server - I don't know what this means. I don't know what "Kiali application" is referring to - its all the Server.

Perhaps this - this makes more sense to me:
```suggestion
Kiali console (front end):: The Kiali console is a web application. 	The Kiali Server serves the Kiali console, which then queries back to the Kiali Server for data to present it to the user.
```

In addition, Kiali depends on external services and components provided by the container application platform and Istio.

> Red Hat Service Mesh (Istio):: Istio is a Kiali requirement. Istio is the component that provides and controls the service mesh. Although Kiali and Istio can be installed separately, Kiali depends on Istio and will not work if it is not present. Kiali needs to retrieve Istio data and configurations, which are exposed through Prometheus and the cluster API.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what we call the "OpenShift cluster's API" or the "Kubernetes API server". Just "cluster API" doesn't seem right.

Author: In OCP core, it's "Cluster APIs": https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/rest_api/cluster_apis/cluster-apis-index.html

Reviewer: Those are actually different. "Cluster APIs" are a specific resource of the OpenShift API Server, the one you linked, and Kiali does not use that resource. Kiali uses the OpenShift API server not the "Cluster APIs". This is why I think "Cluster API" is confusing.

> Prometheus:: A dedicated Prometheus instance is included as part of the {SMProductName} installation. When Istio telemetry is enabled, metrics data are stored in Prometheus. Kiali uses this Prometheus data to determine the mesh topology, display metrics, calculate health, show possible problems, and so on. Kiali communicates directly with Prometheus and assumes the data schema used by Istio Telemetry. Prometheus is an Istio dependency and a hard dependency for Kiali, and many of Kiali's features will not work without Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: > A dedicated Prometheus instance is included as part of the {SMProductName} installation

I thought Prometheus is NO LONGER included as part of OSSM. It was included in OSSM 2.x, but it is an optional add-on for OSSM 3 (though if it is not installed, Kiali cannot be installed either because Kiali won't work without Prometheus).

```suggestion
Prometheus:: A dedicated Prometheus instance is an optional add-on component within the {SMProductName} installation. When Istio telemetry is enabled, metrics data are stored in Prometheus. Kiali uses this Prometheus data to determine the mesh topology, display metrics, calculate health, show possible problems, and so on. Kiali communicates directly with Prometheus and assumes the data schema used by Istio Telemetry. Prometheus is an Istio dependency and a hard dependency for Kiali, and many of Kiali's features will not work without Prometheus.
```

> Cluster API:: Kiali uses the API of the {product-title} (cluster API) to fetch and resolve service mesh configurations. Kiali queries the cluster API to retrieve, for example, definitions for namespaces, services, deployments, pods, and other entities. Kiali also makes queries to resolve relationships between the different cluster entities. The cluster API is also queried to retrieve Istio configurations like virtual services, destination rules, route rules, gateways, quotas, and so on.

Reviewer: This is why I think "Cluster API" is confusing. Kiali actually just queries the Kubernetes/OpenShift API server which is not OpenShift Service Mesh.

Author: {ocp-product-title} is OpenShift. Would it be better if it said: {ocp-product-title} Cluster API:: Kiali uses {ocp-product-title} API to fetch and resolve ....

Author: Thanks!

> Tracing:: Tracing is optional, but when you install {DTProductName} and Kiali is configured, the Kiali console includes a tab to display distributed tracing data. Note that tracing data will not be available if you disable Istio’s distributed tracing feature. Also note that the user must have access to the namespace where the Istio control plane is installed to view tracing data.

Reviewer: It's more than just showing a tab. You also get tracing integration on the graph itself.

> Tracing:: Tracing is optional, but when you install {DTProductName} and Kiali is configured, the Kiali console includes a tab to display distributed tracing data. Note that tracing data will not be available if you disable Istio’s distributed tracing feature. Also note that the user must have access to the namespace where the Istio control plane is installed to view tracing data.

Reviewer 2: > Also note that the user must have access to the namespace where the Istio control plane is installed to view tracing data.

@josunect Is this true? I did not think user access to the control plane namespace is required to see tracing. Maybe you need access to the namespace where the TRACING component is installed (be it Jaeger or Tempo), but not control plane namespace. Yes, the tracing namespace and control plane namespace could be the same, but ignore that.

Reviewer 3: But right, reading that again, the user doesn't have to have access to control plane namespace. The user won't need access to the tracing namespace for what I know. It would need information to the namespace where it needs to see tracing data.

> Grafana:: Grafana is optional. When available, the metrics pages of Kiali display links to direct the user to the same metric in Grafana. Note that user must have access to the namespace where the Istio control plane is installed to view links to the Grafana dashboard and view Grafana data.

Reviewer 2: > Note that user must have access to the namespace where the Istio control plane is installed to view links to the Grafana dashboard and view Grafana data.

Again, I'm not sure this is true. If it is, it is news to me :) @josunect  can confirm.

Reviewer 3: Yes, you can see the links even if the user doesn't have access to the control plane: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8379262c-cd4a-44cf-b589-ed6736369985)
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ba4d5ee9-3750-4fe4-b31e-d14ec7a8ba9d)

With an user with access, you can see the same links: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cef26b75-4a20-4f90-8074-3e9760989a42)

Grafana:: Grafana is optional. When available, the metrics pages of Kiali display links to direct the user to the same metric in Grafana. Note that user must have access to the namespace where the Istio control plane is installed to view links to the Grafana dashboard and view Grafana data.

== Kiali features

The Kiali console is integrated with Red Hat Service Mesh and provides the following capabilities:

Health:: Quickly identify issues with applications, services, or workloads.

Topology:: Visualize how your applications, services, or workloads communicate via the Kiali graph.

Metrics::  Predefined metrics dashboards let you chart service mesh and application performance for Go, Node.js. Quarkus, Spring Boot, Thorntail and Vert.x. You can also create your own custom dashboards.

> Tracing:: Integration with Jaeger lets you follow the path of a request through various microservices that make up an application.

Reviewer 4: Should we change Jaeger to Tempo as that's what we support?

Reviewer 2: @gwynnemonahan yes, I think we can say Tempo here.

Author: Thank you for confirming!

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// about/ossm-about-concepts-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="ossm-about-concepts-kiali_{context}"]
= {SMProductName} and Kiali

//Kiali attributes are in the works, and possible {KialiProduct} will refer to Kiali provided by Red Hat, and not Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat.
//Kiali attributes are outside the scope of this PR.
//TP1 content. IA influx, likely everything will change for GA.

> Kiali is based on the open source link:https://kiali.io/[Kiali project]. Kiali provided by Red Hat is composed of three parts:

Reviewer 5: Per [doc guidelines](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#lead-in-link-sentence-style-for-the-link-attribute): When pointing to a link that exists external to Red Hat’s customer portal documentation, add the link attribute, and use the <document_heading_name> (<document_source>) format.

* {KialiProduct}
* Kiali Server
* {SMPlugin}

Working together, they form the user interface (UI) for {SMProduct}. Kiali provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices and how they are connected.

> Kiali provides observability into the Service Mesh running on {ocp-product-title}. Kiali helps you define, validate, and observe your Istio service mesh. It helps you to understand the structure of your service mesh by inferring the topology, and also provides information about the health of your service mesh.

Reviewer 5: Are these redundant? The first refers to any service mesh; the second is the OCP Service Mesh? Do we need them both?
> Kiali provides visibility into your service mesh
>Kiali provides observability into the Service Mesh running

Kiali provides an interactive graph view of your mesh namespaces in near real time that provides visibility into features like circuit breakers, request rates, latency, and even graphs of traffic flows. Kiali offers insights about components at different levels, from Applications to Services and Workloads, and can display the interactions with contextual information and charts on the selected graph node or edge.

> Kiali also provides the ability to validate your Istio configurations, such as gateways, destination rules, virtual services, mesh policies, and more. Kiali provides detailed metrics, and a basic Grafana integration is available for advanced queries. Distributed tracing is provided by integrating {TempoName} and {OTELName} into the Kiali console.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kiali also provides the ability to validate your Istio configurations, such as gateways, destination rules, virtual services, mesh policies, and so forth. Kiali provides detailed metrics, and a basic Grafana integration is available for advanced queries. Distributed tracing is provided by integrating {TempoName} and {OTELName} into the Kiali console.
```

[id="kiali-architecture_{context}"]
== Kiali architecture

> Kiali Server (back end):: This component runs in the container application platform and communicates with the service mesh components, retrieves and processes data, and exposes this data to the console. The Kiali Server does not need storage. When deploying the Server to a cluster, configurations are set in ConfigMaps and secrets.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kiali Server (back end):: This component runs in the container application platform and communicates with the service mesh components, retrieves and processes data, and exposes this data to the console. The Kiali Server does not need storage. When deploying the Server to a cluster, configurations are set in config maps and secrets.
```

> Kiali console (front end):: The Kiali console is a web application. 	The Kiali Server serves the Kiali console, which then queries back to the Kiali Server for data to present it to the user.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kiali console (front end):: The Kiali console is a web application. The Kiali Server serves the Kiali console, which then queries back to the Kiali Server for data to present it to the user.
```

Reviewer 5: Where this is a definition for the console, can you make this sentence console-centric?

```suggestion
Kiali console (front end):: The Kiali console is a web application. The console queries the Kiali Server for data to present it to the user.
```

In addition, Kiali depends on external services and components provided by the container application platform and Istio.

Red Hat Service Mesh (Istio):: Istio is a Kiali requirement. Istio is the component that provides and controls the service mesh. Although Kiali and Istio can be installed separately, Kiali depends on Istio and will not work if it is not present. Kiali needs to retrieve Istio data and configurations, which are exposed through Prometheus and the {product-title} cluster API.

> Prometheus:: A dedicated Prometheus instance optional. When Istio telemetry is enabled, metrics data are stored in Prometheus. Kiali uses this Prometheus data to determine the mesh topology, display metrics, calculate health, show possible problems, and so on. Kiali communicates directly with Prometheus and assumes the data schema used by Istio Telemetry. Prometheus is an Istio dependency and a hard dependency for Kiali, and many of Kiali's features will not work without Prometheus.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Prometheus:: A dedicated Prometheus instance is optional. When Istio telemetry is enabled, metrics data are stored in Prometheus. Kiali uses this Prometheus data to determine the mesh topology, display metrics, calculate health, show possible problems, and so on. Kiali communicates directly with Prometheus and assumes the data schema used by Istio Telemetry. Prometheus is an Istio dependency and a hard dependency for Kiali, and many of Kiali's features will not work without Prometheus.
```

> {ocp-product-title} API:: Kiali uses {ocp-product-title} API to fetch and resolve service mesh configurations. Kiali queries the cluster API to retrieve, for example, definitions for namespaces, services, deployments, pods, and other entities. Kiali also makes queries to resolve relationships between the different cluster entities. The cluster API is also queried to retrieve Istio configurations like virtual services, destination rules, route rules, gateways, quotas, and so on.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
{ocp-product-title} API:: Kiali uses the {ocp-product-title} API to fetch and resolve service mesh configurations. For example, Kiali queries the cluster API to retrieve definitions for namespaces, services, deployments, pods, and other entities. Kiali also makes queries to resolve relationships between the different cluster entities. The cluster API is also queried to retrieve Istio configurations like virtual services, destination rules, route rules, gateways, quotas, and so on.
```

Reviewer 5: >The cluster API is also queried

Can this be made active voice easily?

> Tracing:: Tracing is optional, but when you install {DTProductName} and Kiali is configured, the Kiali console includes a tab to display distributed tracing data, and tracing integration on the graph itself. Note that tracing data will not be available if you disable Istio’s distributed tracing feature. Also note that the user must have access to the namespace where the user needs to see tracing data.

Reviewer 5: My ignorance, do we need to mention TempoName here?

Author: No, it should be {DTProductName}

Grafana:: Grafana is optional. When available, the metrics pages of Kiali display links to direct the user to the same metric in Grafana. Note that Grafana is not supported as part of {ocp-product-title} or {SMProduct}.

[id="kiali-features_{context}"]
== Kiali features

The Kiali console is integrated with {SMProduct} and provides the following capabilities:

Health:: Quickly identify issues with applications, services, or workloads.

> Topology:: Visualize how your applications, services, or workloads communicate via the Kiali graph.

Reviewer 5: Per [ISG](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=word-usage#v): Use this term, which means by way of, to refer to routing data, such as in “Messages are routed via SMTP”.

```suggestion
Topology:: Visualize how your applications, services, or workloads communicate through (?) the Kiali graph.
```

Metrics::  Predefined metrics dashboards let you chart service mesh and application performance for Go, Node.js. Quarkus, Spring Boot, Thorntail and Vert.x. You can also create your own custom dashboards.

Tracing:: Integration with {TempoName} lets you follow the path of a request through various microservices that make up an application.

Validations:: Perform advanced validations on the most common Istio objects (Destination Rules, Service Entries, Virtual Services, and so on).

Configuration:: Optional ability to create, update and delete Istio routing configuration using wizards or directly in the YAML editor in the Kiali Console.

[id="openshift-service-mesh-console-plugin_{context}"]
== {SMPlugin}

> The {SMPlugin} is an {ocp-product-title} plugin for {SMProductName}. It integrates much of the {KialiProduct} interface into the OpenShift Console, injecting both a *Service Mesh* main menu option with dedicated screens, as well as integrating “Service Mesh” tabs throughout console.

Reviewer 5: Not sure this is right. I am just unfamiliar with using "" around UI elements. Shrug...
```suggestion
The {SMPlugin} is an {ocp-product-title} plugin for {SMProductName}. It integrates much of the {KialiProduct} interface into the OpenShift Console, injecting both a *Service Mesh* main menu option with dedicated screens, as well as integrating *Service Mesh* tabs throughout console.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// about/ossm-about-concepts-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="ossm-about-concepts-kiali_{context}"]
= {SMProductName} and Kiali

//Kiali attributes are in the works, and possible {KialiProduct} will refer to Kiali provided by Red Hat, and not Kiali Operator provided by Red Hat.
//Kiali attributes are outside the scope of this PR.

Kiali is composed of three parts:

* {KialiProduct}
* Kiali Server
* {SMPlugin}

> Working together, they form the user interface (UI) for {SMProduct}. Kiali provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices in your service mesh, and how they are connected.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Working together, they form the user interface (UI) for {SMProduct}. Kiali provides visibility into your service mesh by showing you the microservices and how they are connected.
```

Kiali provides observability into the Service Mesh running on {ocp-product-title}. Kiali helps you define, validate, and observe your Istio service mesh. It helps you to understand the structure of your service mesh by inferring the topology, and also provides information about the health of your service mesh.

Kiali provides an interactive graph view of your mesh namespaces in near real time that provides visibility into features like circuit breakers, request rates, latency, and even graphs of traffic flows. Kiali offers insights about components at different levels, from Applications to Services and Workloads, and can display the interactions with contextual information and charts on the selected graph node or edge.

Kiali also provides the ability to validate your Istio configurations, such as gateways, destination rules, virtual services, mesh policies, and more. Kiali provides detailed metrics, and a basic Grafana integration is available for advanced queries. Distributed tracing is provided by integrating {TempoName} and {OTELName} into the Kiali console.

[id="kiali-architecture_{context}"]
== Kiali architecture

> Kiali is based on the open source link:https://kiali.io/[Kiali project]. Kiali is composed of two components: the Kiali Server and the Kiali console.

Reviewer 6: This somewhat contradicts the above that states that Kiali is made up of three components, the server, the console and the openshift plugin (ossmc).
